
Create and connect to a MySQL DB instance using Amazon RDS

Owned by Estephe Kana
Last updated: Aug 31, 2024
5 min read
Objectives

At the end of this demo project, you must be able to create a MySQL DB instance with Amazon RDS and connect to it.
Prerequisites

Before starting this demo, you must have an account on AWS
What will you accomplish?

In this demo project, you will:

    Create a MySQL DB instance with AWS RDS

    Create an EC2 instance

    Connect the EC2 instance to the DB instance automatically

    Connect to the MySQL DB instance 

    Delete the DB instance and EC2 instance

Step 1: Create a MySQL database instance

    Login to your AWS management console, click on Services on the menu bar, select database in the left navigation pane and choose RDS to open Amazon RDS.

    From the dashboard page, scroll down to Create database section, then click on Create database

    As the creation method, choose Easy create and MySQL icon as Engine type.

 

    Select the Free Tier template.

    Now let’s configure our database settings as shown below:

        DB instance identifier: mysqldb-demo

        Master username: admin (leave the auto generate password box unchecked)

        Select Self managed as Credentials management

            Master password: school123

            Confirm master password: school123

 
image-20240707-075256.png

    Open View default settings for Easy create and note the VPC value. 

    Click on Create database to create a new database with the previous settings.

    If Suggested add-ons for mysqldb-demo windows popup, just click on Close

The creation process takes some minutes to be done. Then you can see the database status is Available
Step 2: Create an EC2 instance

In this section, we will create an Amazon EC2 instance with:

    The name: ec2-mysqldb-connect

    AMI machine: Amazon Linux 

    Instance type: t2.micro

    Create a new key pair: db-connect-key

    And attach the same VPC as for the DB instance (default VPC  in my case). This will help in the next step to connect the EC2 instance to the database.

If you don’t know how to create an EC2 instance, follow this documentation: Click here

 

Finally, the EC2 instance has been created successfully.
Step 3: Connect the EC2 instance to the DB instance automatically

To connect an EC2 instance and the DB instance automatically, follow the instructions below:

    Go to Amazon RDS service

    Click on Databases in the left panel.

    Choose mysqldb-demo database and click on Actions, then choose Set up EC2 connection

    In the Set up EC2 connection, choose the EC2 instance we created ( ec2-mysqldb-connect) and click on Continue.

    Then Click on Set up in the Review and confirm page. You will get a notification that says: Connection setup successfully for RDS database

Step 4: Connect to the MySQL DB instance

Once the connection is established between the DB instance and the EC2 instance, you can connect the the DB instance. To connect to the MySQL DB instance, follow the steps below:

    Go to Amazon RDS service

    Click on Databases in the left panel.

    Click on mysqldb-demo database.

    On the Connectivity & security tab, copy the endpoint and the port number

Note: Make sure port 22 is open in the inbound rule of the server to allow access via ssh.

    Connect to the EC2 instance in ssh:

        Go to EC2 service

        Click on Instances in the left panel, then click on the instance ID of ec2-mysqldb-connect.

        Click on Connect button

        Click in the SSH client tab, then copy the chmod and ssh commands in the example.

    Open your git bash terminal and paste the command below (replace chmod and ssh commands with those you copied before)

cd ~/Downloads
chmod 400 db-connect-key.pem
ssh -i "db-connect-key.pem" ec2-user@ec2-44-202-0-20.compute-1.amazonaws.com

    Now, install the mysql command-line client from MariaDB with the commands below:

sudo yum update -y
sudo yum install mariadb105-server -y

    To connect to the MySQL DB instance, change the endpoint in the below command and run it.

mysql -h mysqldb-demo.c2qyimycqlj9.us-east-1.rds.amazonaws.com -P 3306 -u admin -p

Then enter the password: school123

    Run this SQL command in MySQL prompt to get the current date and time:

SELECT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP;

You have successfully connected an EC2 instance to your RDS database.
Step 5: Delete the DB instance and EC2 instance

Finally, we have done the objective of this demo project. We have to delete all instances created for the project the avoid extra charges.
Delete the EC2 instance

To delete the EC2 instance, follow the instructions below:

    Connect to the AWS EC2 service

    Click on Instances in the left panel, then choose ec2-mysqldb-connect

    Click on Instance state, choose Terminate instance, then Click on Terminate

Delete the MySQL DB instance

To delete the MySQL DB instance, follow the steps below:

    Go to Amazon RDS service.

    Click on Databases in the left panel.

    Click on mysqldb-demo database.

    Click on Actions, choose Delete 

    Uncheck Create final snapshot box

    uncheck Retain automated backups box

    Check the Ack then type delete me in the field and click the Delete button.

image-20240707-092522.png

 