
Launch Docker swarm on EC2 Instances using terraform
Be the first to add a reaction

Owned by noel.tatah (Unlicensed)
Last updated: Aug 29, 2024 by Estephe Kana
4 min read

In this tutorial, we will launch the Docker swarm lab using two methods.

    Using Terraform 

    Using Manual method

Launch the infrastructure using Terraform

Our infrastructure is made up of 3 EC2 instances. One of the instances will serve as the master node, the other 2 instances will serve as the worker nodes.

Let's go ahead and create the infrastructure.

Navigate to the directory
cd DevOpsLab

Now create a directory Docker which we will use to create all the Docker labs and projects.
mkdir Docker

Now move into the directory
cd Docker

and clone the code from GitHub
git clone https://github.com/utrains/Docker-swarm-with-terraform.git

Now, move into the Docker-swarm-with-terraform directory
cd Docker-swarm-with-terraform

Once in the directory, go ahead and create the infrastructure using Terraform.

Run the commands below on your bash shell
terraform init

Next, run the terraform plan
terraform plan

Now, run Terraform apply to create the infrastructure
terraform apply --auto-approve

once the infrastructure is completely created, you will get the results below.

Take note of the various outputs and their labels because you will need them later.

Now copy the ssh login to the master as highlighted above and ssh into the master.

Once inside the master, run the command below to verify if the swarm is up and running.
docker node ls

We can see that we have 3 nodes and the master node is tagged Leader.

 You succeeded in launching your docker swarm cluster using Terraform. We will now see how we can do it manually.
Manually creating a Docker Swarm

We are going to create  a swarm with 3 nodes (that is, one controller and two worker nodes.) 

To begin with, we need to create 3 servers. We can name the servers Master, Node1 and Node2 respectively. Since we are using AWS, we are going to create EC2 instances on AWS.

Note that you need to expose the following ports for the swarm to function properly 

    TCP port 2376 for secure Docker client communication. This port is required for the Docker Machine to work. A Docker Machine is used to orchestrate Docker hosts.

    TCP port 2377. This port is used for communication between the nodes of a Docker Swarm or cluster. It only needs to be opened on manager nodes.

    TCP and UDP port 7946 for communication among nodes (container network discovery).

    UDP port 4789 for overlay network traffic (container ingress networking).

    TCP port 22 to SSH into our instances remotely

Since we are on AWS,  you will need to open these ports in the instance security group

On all the 3 nodes, Run the commands below
sudo yum update
sudo yum -y install docker
sudo service docker start
sudo usermod -a -G docker ec2-user
sudo chkconfig docker on
sudo yum install python3-pip -y
pip3 install docker-compose

If you get the following error:

ERROR: pip's dependency resolver does not currently take into account all the packages that are installed. This behaviour is the source of the following dependency conflicts.

docker 7.1.0 requires urllib3>=1.26.0, but you have urllib3 1.25.4 which is incompatible.

Fix it using the following commands:
pip3 uninstall urllib3 -y
pip3 install urllib3==1.26.14

Once done, let's go ahead and configure the master
Configure the Docker swarm master node

on the EC2 console, click on the Instance-master  

in the details, take note of the private IP we will need it letter to create a master node.

After noting the private IP, click on connect to the master server (the server you want to use as the master).

Once inside your instance, run the command below, replacing private-ip with that you copied above.
docker swarm init --advertise-addr private-ip

If the command runs successfully, the output will be similar to the one below.

Now copy the highlighted command and ssh into each of the worker nodes (the servers you want to use as the worker nodes)  and run the command.

You can see the output that says the node has joined the swarm.

Once all the nodes have been added to the swarm, ssh into the master node and run the command below.
docker node ls

You should get an output similar to the one below.

Congratulations, you just created your first docker swarm. You can practice more with the deployment of a multi-container app with Docker Swarm (link here)



DEPLOYMENT STAGE DOWN


Deploy a multicontainer app with Docker Swarm

Owned by Suzie Fontang
Last updated: Aug 29, 2024 by Estephe Kana
3 min read

In this tutorial, we will show the difference when deploying a multi-container app with a docker swarm
Prerequisites

Before starting this lab, you need to:

    Make sure your docker swarm lab is up and running. You can follow the tutorial Here.

Application architecture and description

In this architecture, we have:

    A Python web app (voting-app) which lets you vote between two options

    A Redis queue which collects new votes

    A .NET worker which consumes votes and stores them in a database

    A Postgres database backed by a Docker volume

    A Node.js (result-app) web app which shows the results of the voting in real time

The voting application only accepts one vote per client. It does not register votes if a vote has already been submitted by a client.
Infrastructure setup

Our docker swarm will contain:

    A master server: manager

    two worker servers: node1 and node 2

We will use Terraform to launch this infrastructure in AWS. Use this documentation to deploy our infrastructure in AWS
Application deployment

Once the cluster is up and properly configured, we can deploy our application following the steps:

1- Create the .yml file in the master server

Log in to the master server and create a .yml file called voting_app.yml
vi voting_app.yml

Copy and paste the content below in the file
version: "3"
services:
   vote:
       image: eesprit/voting-app-vote
       ports:
       - "8020:80"
   redis:
       image: redis:alpine
   worker:
       image: eesprit/voting-app-worker
   db:
       image: postgres:9.4
       environment:
           POSTGRES_HOST_AUTH_METHOD: trust
   result:
       image: eesprit/voting-app-result
       ports:
       - "8021:80"

2- Deploy the app

When running Docker Engine in swarm mode, you can use docker stack deploy to deploy a complete application stack to the swarm. Run the following command for the deployment:
docker stack deploy --compose-file voting_app.yml App

Then run this command to check if the service is started. 
docker stack services App

You will get the following result

3- Test the app

After running the commands, let’s test if the application is working:
Open your browser, then use the IP address of the master followed by the port numbers 8020 and 8021: Mine here is master-ip:8020 and master-ip: 8021

 

Now, use the IP address of any worker node followed by the port numbers 8020 and 8021: Mine here is worker-ip:8020 and worker-ip: 8021

I voted for cats, and we can see 50% of the results of the cats from our screenshot.

You can use docker swarm to deploy a multi-container application on multiple hosts.
Cleanup

When done with your instances, always remember to destroy them to avoid further charges on AWS.

If you used Terraform for your infrastructure setup, you can easily use the command terraform destroy to clean up everything!

 



 