Deploy a wordpress website with Lightsail

Owned by Suzie Fontang
Last updated: Aug 29, 2024 by Estephe Kana
3 min read

In this tutorial, we will follow the steps to deploy a simple WordPress website on Amazon Lightsail
Go to the Lightsail console

First login to your AWS management console using your email and password (the one you used while creating your AWS free tier account). Then click on services and go to the Compute domain. Select Lighsail 
Launch an instance with the WordPress Blueprint

On the Lightsail home page, let’s launch a server with the WordPress blueprint

    Click on Create instance

    In the Instance location, you can allow  the AZ to Virginia or click on Change AWS Region and Availability zone and select your preferred AZ 

    Select the Linux/Unix platform

 

    Select WordPress as a blueprint (Apps + OS)

    Scroll down and click on Change SSH key pair

    Click on Create New to create a new key (if you already have one and you know its location on your computer, you can choose it). Give the name wordpress-server then generate the key. Also, make sure you download the key.

    Choose the $ 7 plan then check the instance Name. The name of the instance here is WordPress-1

    Scroll down and click on Create instance. Wait for the status to change from Pending to Running. Then click on the instance name to get more information

Connect to the instance

Now, click on the shell icon to connect to the instance. In the terminal that opens, run the following command to display the password we will use to configure the website: 
cat bitnami_application_password

Copy the password and keep it handy somewhere on your computer.

Let’s connect to the instance from the browser with the Public IP address.

Copy the Public IP address and paste it into the browser to configure the WordPress site: IP-address/wp-admin.php
Example: 34.200.201.106/wp-login.php
Connect to the WordPress dashboard

Now, connect to the WordPress Dashboard with the credentials:

    Username: user

    Password: The password you copied

In the dashboard, click on Appearance then Theme.  Click on live preview for the theme Twenty Twenty-two to see how it is displayed. 

Modify the theme and view what the site displays.

Click on Activate Twenty Twenty-two, then choose Activate
Screenshot from 2024-05-25 09-19-41.png

Go back to the Dashboard, click on the site name then click on Visit Site

You have a basic WordPress website up and running. You can make modifications as you wish.
Cleanup

When done with the instance, we need to delete it to avoid further charges. Make sure you delete the instance. 

